---
title: The Idea
layout: post
post-image: /assets/images/SamplePost.png
description: What is Project Grief?
tags:
- post
- gamedesign
---

## The Idea
The team wanted several things while thinking about the main ideas of the game.
* The skills they wanted to work on or polish
* The global mindset of the game
* A wow effect with an interresting gameplay
* Trying to get enough visibility to continue the adventure

### The skills
Anaïs wants to work again on 3D modelling/animation, and also learning vfx with shader graph and vfx graph from Unity. At the same time she would probably learn Html5/Css to use the new UI system from Unity.
Mathieu wants to code unusual stuff, probably learning back all the mathematics for ligthing and physics. And simply learn anything necessary to complete the team skill set.

So the requirements for Anaïs are to do a 3D game, with some nice effects. But not something to heavy on the UI part, to focus more on the other tasks.
And for Mathieu it's about doing something crazy about procedural generation. Maybe a bit frustrated that the previous game they worked on was too simple for him on this part.
Another thing that we will put in the skills, is the use of Unity DOTS, otherwise the new version of Unity using some concepts that are the ones Mathieu worked with since he started programming.

### The mindset
The team was on the same page here. They wanted to not go crazy with this first game (that part was definitely forgot later). They wanted something more about an experience with things to say to the player.
Avoiding fighting is also something they come with at the very beginning, because the common ones didn't suite the idea and the others were too big for the scope. In the end, they started to think about some atmospheric game with exploration and puzzles.
Atmospheric like Hollow Knight and exploration and puzzles like Zelda : BOTW, at least this are some games we can give you as an idea. 

### Wow effect and gameplay
Maybe the procedural stuff could be a Wow effect for some people, but let's be realistic, the game need something crazy from a graphical point of view, something BIG.
And not something just there to be nice, it needs to be at the center of the game. That's why the team wanted to implement a switch world mechanic, where the player localy create a sphere which switch the world according to the type of sphere.
Switching world would also mean switching player abilities (only 2 of them), to have a gameplay proper to each world.
It's not something heavy present in video games, and if we accumulate this with the idea of puzzle and exploration as other core ideas, it can make them far more interresting if well done.
Trying to figure out something coherent for the worlds used, they found than Grief usually refer too 4 emotional states (denial, anger, bargaing and depression) if you remove acceptation. Which is pretty much perfect because a Dpad on a gamepad has 4 value, so it could be used as a selector.
4 isn't a scary number for a small team and last but not least, the theme is emotional and narratively strong.

### Finding a niche
With everythin said before, it become clear that the team want to do some atmospheric 3D plateformer using exploration and puzzles instead of fighting. Which doesn't feel like an usual game already. But taking a look at the existing and upcoming games,
it become clear that the atmospheric part is the selling argument of the game.

*In the end, reducing the scope of the game and planning it step by step, the world switching feature was "removed". In fact it is only a Denail ability in the current Game Design document.
And we are going to share some of it with you, in our next posts !*